>> Will Sentance: But it all relates to
what our dear friend Seth kindly brought
up, which is, my dream to be able to list
off my lines of code, by name and say,
you go now run them one by one and
take the input 11 for the first one.
And have its output of that first line
only be affecting only locked into only
affecting by the very nature of reduce
only be affected in the next nine out
of three, whose cords was only
affects the next time, we got it.
I'm not the and by the way,
given his only effect is the next line
there's no need for me to state arguments.
I'm gonna auto run that function under
the hood through the help reduce.
Problem is,
I'm therefore gonna have no control
over the inputs I pass the function.
For example, that add three function
I've got a problem if that add three
function expects two inputs.
Suppose I hadn't added to numbers
function is going to be a big problem.
Well, we're gonna discover this sort
of second half, we're gonna solve that.
But to do so, we wanna think firstly,
if we're building applications
centered around little baby
functions is that cool unit.
From which we build up our applications.
My goodness,
what if we could give them a superpower?
What if we could make them
as powerful as possible?
And closure is gonna do that for us.
And it's gonna be vital for later on
enabling us to success problem that he
raised,that holder if I'm listening or
functions, and
one of them expects two inputs,
and I've only got one of them,
only one input the output of the previous
line, how can I adjust that function?
When it's gonna turn out,
I'm gonna prefill that function,
I'm gonna need that function,
to have some sort of little persistent
memory data store attached to it,
into which I can store the other
input of that function, so
that it only actually needs one to run.
But it's gonna rely all on closure.
So here we go.
The most esoteric concept in JavaScript in
my opinion, although having seen reduce,
I don't know.
Functions are our units to build but
they're limited.
Every time they run they
forget their previous running.
Now especially with no global states
that's not a great thing that every single
time they run they forget the previous
anything about the previous time they ran.
Imagine if we could give our functions
memories, permanent memories.
The things we could do.
And I do want somebody to raise a
challenge with this through the functional
programming lens at some point, and
I'll give you some thoughts on that.
But for now, let's remind ourselves
exactly how functions actually work.
Go to function, move over to here.
That's right.
Once again,
I want to do it because I want you all
to just get ourselves back in the flow.
MultiplyBy2 is a function here.
When I run it with the input of 7 my
parameter, what's my parameter here for
multiplyBy2, Alex?
>> Alex: Input number.
>> Will Sentance: Input number
is filled in with what?
>> Alex: 7.
>> Will Sentance: 7, perfect, and
7 by 2 is returned out 14 to output.
When I run multiplyBy2 again,
this time I'm going to input a 3.
Does it have any memory that it
was previously run with seven?
Absolutely not that easy,
why wasn't worth writing direct result?
I think we got that one.
No memory, the previous execution.
Imagine if we could give our
functions permanent memories.
Now this may, this may [LAUGH] sound on
is this I'm doing some volunteer work
well we're going to talk about that.
But for now, let's imagine we give out
functions permanent memories such that
they remember things about
their previous invocation.
Previous runnings, but it all begins with
returning a function from a function.
Now, if you've been to close your heart,
raise your hand if you've ever been to
the closure hoppers you've watched.
Close your heart.
Yeah, okay.
Then we've seen this before.
We're gonna use it to achieve some really
powerful functional promo techniques.
We do need to start it off.
And this little thing here, it all begins
with returning a function from a function.
Maybe we're now so in the head of
functions being little things bundled up
we can pass around that
we're gonna find this okay.
But know that the next page of
code I've done in front of,
these fancy engineering organisations and
seeing senior engineers not really have
precisely down what's happening here.
So let's see that for
ourselves and build it out.
We're going to save a function,
we're going to call it function creator,
no inputs, we're going to then run it and
still whatever his output is.
Intergenerational funk, we run it one
time, right multiple times and arts.
We're definitely not storing function
creator in a generation funk.
We're instead gonna run function creator,
whatever it returns out which probably
people are already starting to guess
that's gonna be generated fun.
And then the very next line,
we're going to run.
Well, hopefully whatever we got out of
jury the funk is a function as well.
We're gonna use generated
funk as a new label for
that function that came
out of function creator.
I wanna stress to you that even seasoned
engineers look at this code all the time
they go generated fun what's generated
fun invited to all its function creator.
All right, so
I throw two in the function creator.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Raise your hand if you think well,
I don't know.
Raise your hand if you've ever
instinctively maybe thought that's what's
happening here.
Yeah, a few of us, right?
I wouldn't be surprised, I absolutely
have seen I'm talking seasoned engineers,
I'm talking engineers with
ten years experience,
who kind of get confused about this.
No, we're gonna see this as a one-time
running of function creator,
save whatever comes out of
it in generated fun, and
then never care about function creator
every again unless we use it again.
And generatedFunc is now whatever
came out of function creator.
Which presumably is a function of free,
but let's go through this line by line and
understand it incompletion.
Alex, line one, what are we saving?
>> Alex: Clearing function
label function creator.
>> Will Sentance: Excellent, there it is.
No different than normal.
Saving it into global memory
function creates its own function.
People were almost there.
Slash not.
All right, next line,
Anna left hand side of next line.
>> Anna: Declaring a function
called generatedFunc.
>> Will Sentance: I wouldn't say that,
declaring a label generated funk
into which will be stored what Ana?
>> Anna: The function creator?
>> Will Sentance: Is she right?
She's spot on, exactly!
The output, the executed,
no, that's not right,
the return value of executing
function creator is running it.
And, Anna, what told you that,
what symbols told you that that
right-hand side was work to be done?
>> Anna: The parenthesis.
>> Will Sentance: The parenthesis,
exactly.
It's a thousand times people have found
this single line one of the hardest,
it's the biggest gotcha in Java.
It's not really a gotcha, a gotchas like
more of a trick, it's more like just,
we really need to understand what
we're doing when we run functions.
What we're doing when we say functions.
What we're doing when we declare labels,
to know what's happening in this line.
Okay, there it is, generatedFunc.
For now, it's uninitialized.
I was gonna tell you why.
Why we say uninitialized on defined
was what would happen when you
declared you will label that was gonna be
the output of the function on
the right hand side with valve.
Then with the fault one fine,
one find while the function ran and
then you would redefine it as
a result of the function call.
With a const declaration,
you can't have two data types changed out.
You can't declare it is
undefined initially.
Default is one to find and then when you
get the result of the function call,
suddenly switch it out to whatever
the result of the function call is.
So instead, you don't even actually
fully declare the label generatedFunc
until you've actually got the result
of the right hand side running.
This relates back to Charles's
question much earlier,
about undefined versus uninitialized,
generated func declared, what do
we need honor to go and execute to figure
out what to store in generated func?
What do we need to go and
execute to figure out what to
store into generated func?
>> Anna: Function creator.
>> Will Sentance: Function creator,
let's get executing.
All right, so
we're gonna execute functionCreator.
Anna, we need a new what?
>> Anna: Execution context.
>> Will Sentance: Excellent.
>> Anna: [LAUGH]
>> Will Sentance: And we know that
whatever comes out of it,
is going to be stored into generatedFunc.
Let's create our execution context,
there it is.
And [LAUGH] it's a rhombus at this point.
And Charles into it we go line one.
What are we gonna do?
We're not gonna use this thing
I just want you to show,
I just want to make sure everyone
knows we're saving stuff into memory.
What's the first thing
we save into memory?
>> Charles: Counter.
>> Will Sentance: Counter is zero.
>> Charles: Counter is zero.
>> Will Sentance: Exactly.
Okay, I'm gonna do my call stack as well
actually for this one, it turns out to be
increasingly important to think in
terms of it to not get confused.
All right?
And first thing on it will always global,
but what are we adding to it, Michael?
>> Michael: Add three.
Function creator.
>> Will Sentance: Function creator
because we're calling what function
right now Michael?
>> Michael: We're calling
function creator.
>> Will Sentance: Function creator.
So we're going to add it to the call
stack because our execution context in
action right now is function creator's.
Our thread of execution has
woven into function creator.
That's where we are right now,
it's top of our call stack, okay?
David, we've saved counter is
zero inside the local memory.
David, next line what's it say to do?
>> David: We're declaring
a function with the label at three.
>> Will Sentance: At three,
there is, there it is.
Okay are we gonna use it David?
>> David: Not right now.
>> Will Sentance: No what are we
gonna do with it instead?
>> David: We're gonna return it.
>> Will Sentance: Exactly i'm gonna
write that here return at three.
Anybody wanna tell me therefore
what Javascript actually
does in that return statement?
Jasmine you wanna tell me what
Javascript does in that return statement
return at three?
>> Jasmine: It replaces
at three with a function.
>> Will Sentance: You hear this?
Exactly.
It looks at the function
definition using that label and
it grabs the function definition, which
is the bit in the parentheses nom and
then the body of it it grabs all that and
it returns it out
of the cool to function creator and
stores it Jasmine where?
>> Jasmine: In generated func.
>> Will Sentance: Into generated func.
She is spot on.
Into generated func, it goes.
It was formerly known as its
birth name was add three.
But now we returned out all the code,
grabbed it all,
shot it out the bottom no name.
We lost that name.
We just returned that we just use it to
look up the function as Jasmine said, and
it got stored into generated func.
If I were to now console log
generated func, I would see
input num body, whatever it says cons
result equals num plus three return,
that is now generated func, that is
what it means to return a function.
From another function.
Let's now, so this is now popped off
the cool stack and all this goodies here.
Well, in theory,
the execution context is gone.
The execution context is all deleted.
And
>> Will Sentance: Look at that,
that's rather nice.
And we go back out to global where we
hit what line, Sam left hand side?
>> Sam: Result.
>> Will Sentance: Result, and the right
hand side says go run what function Sam?
>> Sam: Generated func.
>> Will Sentance: Go run generated func.
And what was generated
func's original name, Sam?
>> Sam: Function creator.
>> Will Sentance: Aaah.
It's so easy to think it right?
What is generated func?
>> Sam: Add three.
>> Will Sentance: Folk with literally 10,
15 years experiences, and
enormous gifts in engineering, still get
caught by this every single time and
yet if we don't get it absolutely precise
in our head everything falls apart
in understanding what's the conclusion.
1,000 times.
I've really stressed for you, Sam is in
the company of I'm literally talking about
like the rock stone, I don't want to use
that silly term, the superstar developer,
she's the person that to all so
every single time this throws people.
We've got to go run
that function one time,
store something in generated func it
is the functionality of add three.
And from that line on generated func is
the code formerly known as add three.
Thank you, Sam Hollasey because everybody
is going, yeah I felt the same thing.
Appreciate that from Sam.
So generated fund Jasmine is
the function that was born as
>> Jasmine: As add three?
>> Will Sentance: As add three.
The function definition formerly
known as add three now known as
generated func its global label that was
its label inside a function created when
it was originally saved just like
we save count from side of that.
But we grabbed its code, we only used,
when it says return add three.
We only used that label to
find the code of the function.
Returned it out stored in generated func.
You only think,
some of you maybe think, I got this.
I promise you people it is a real
toughy out it comes generated
func is really David
the code formerly known as?
>> David: Add three.
>> Will Sentance: Add three meaning
after I leave function creator inside of
which add three was saved I can't call it,
I can't reference add
three anymore it's gone.
Unless I say it in a new global label,
David what was that new global
label I saved add three in.
>> David: Generated func.
>> Will Sentance: Generated func, so
when I run generated func I'm
really running what Eric?
>> Eric: Add three.
>> Will Sentance: Add three.
So if I want to refer to add three
out in global, what's his new name?
Andrew?
>> Andrew: Generated func.
>> Will Sentance: Is generated func
actually function creator, Andrew?
>> Andrew: No.
>> Will Sentance: No, what would I need to
change Andrew in order to make generated
func act as a new label for
the whole function creative code.
What would I need to change in that line,
so
that the generated func is actually just
a label for all of function creator?
>> Andrew: Remove the parentheses, right?
>> Will Sentance: Remove the parentheses.
Spot on very nice from Andrew.
All right, but it is a the output
of a one time running or
function created which actually we've
got it I don't know if we have by
the way I promise you this
is super tricky this bit.
So let's run generated func
new execution context.
There it is let's put
it on the cool stack.
Sorry everybody.
I do apologize, we are executing
generatedfunc, we need a brand new?
>> Alex: Execution.
[CROSSTALK].
>> Will Sentance: Execution code as well.
Excellent generated func for
all we know is add three,
no, yes add three?
With the input of sorry, two, I've done
this so many times with a different
function that I can't get my head out
of it with the input of two sorry vote.
There it is, the input of two,
there we go.
A generatedFunc input of two.
Now, here's the especially tricky
bit in my opinion of all this.
Here's the especially tricky
bit of it all, is in order for
me as a developer to figure out
what generatedFunc is doing,
where do I take my eye Alex in order to
figure out what generatedFunc is doing?
>> Alex: You look at whatever was
returned from functionCreator().
Well, that's a very
sophisticated way of putting it.
>> Will Sentance: Yes, but actually
my eye goes back up to add3, right,
like I have to.
And so we get this false sense
that JavaScript's thread
goes back up into functionCreator().
It definitely does not, and
huge shout out to Alex for stressing that,
by saying actually, it goes and
looks what was saved, in generatedFunc.
Which was the definition of code of add3.
In fact, this f just represents the code
of add3 being saved now in global,
there ain't no going back
into functionCreator().
That's done, that's gone.
Instead we're going and looking at the
code written here, which was roughly num
and then return out numb+3, roughly.
That's where we go and look,
yeah, go ahead, Virginia.
>> Virginia: Just a quick question.
So when you say return add3,
you're saying,
it is it doing a literal
copy of add3 there?
>> Will Sentance: Okay.
>> Virginia: So that when I go and say,
like I say, generateFunc(2) is equal
to add3, so those two different
copies in memory of that function A-
>> Will Sentance: GeneratedFunc-
>> Virginia: So say go back and say,
generateFunc(2) equals
two function generator.
>> Will Sentance: FunctionCreator() being-
>> Virginia: That same-
>> Will Sentance: Even though never being?
>> Will Sentance: Do you see how
important it is to get that technical
communication right?
So let's go into Virginia's question
just a second once you got through this,
but I want you to think Virginia
before we ask the question, you said,
if I went back and wrote generatedFunc(2)
is equal to functionCreator().
>> Virginia: Well calling
functionCreator().
>> Will Sentance: So important, we'll come
back to the question in a second Virginia,
I promise but just yeah, we'll come
back to the question in one second,
I promise Virginia.
But for now, let's stay in generatedFunc.
We're running it, everyone together,
generatedFunc is the function
definition that was originally known when
it was inside of functionCreator() as-
>> Virginia: Add3.
>> Will Sentance: Yeah, good, exactly.
And [LAUGH] so, into it we go.
And, who said function multiplied by two?
That was a good throwback
reference if someone said that.
All right, into it we go.
And unfortunately, although we
don't have to, we can go look here.
What's the parameter to which the two
is gonna be assigned Michael?
>> Michael: Num.
>> Will Sentance: Num,
raise your hand if you looked back into
functionCreator() to figure that out.
Well of course we all did, we can't
memorize all functions coming out.
But I wish we could sort of see in
console log generatedFunc in that middle,
in between those two lines, we should
almost restrict ourselves, make ourselves
console log generatedFunc to figure out
what the code is we're running down there.
So that we don't think of going back into
our code where we initially saved it
because it ain't in there,
we don't get to thread back into that.
Okay, but all right, num is two,
let me do result which
is 2+3 which is 5 and
then we return the value result in 2.
Why did I call them both results?
Dear, I thought I changed that.
Return the value result, everybody,
into what global constant also called?
>> Alex: Results.
>> Will Sentance: That's bad
explanation by me, I apologize.
Note these are in different domains and so
they're not gonna override each other,
okay.
>> Will Sentance: What was I gonna ask?
That's what I was gonna say.
We're gonna come to thumbs where
Virginia is gonna raise her question.
Thumbs on in a moment.
We saved code functionCreator().
There it is.
We then saved a label generatedFunc for
whatever came from a one time
running of functionCreator().
There's the params to say,
go run functionCreator().
Into we went,
we created a brand new function add3 and
then rather than using it,
we returned out its code and
stored it under a new label generatedFunc.
And from then on forevermore,
generatedFunc cares nothing
about functionCreator().
It only cares about the add3
function that's now stored in it.
So we ran it and
we ran generatedFunc and it's just add3.
We can just do it.
It feels weird but we didn't put
prands on the end, no problem.
No problem.
And it's running add3, I'll put two
into it, and it goes num is two.
Result is 2 plus 3 is 5.
Return our result into
global constant result.
Okay, folk, you might be thinking
why the hell did we do this?
Why the hell did we save a function
we could have declared globally
inside another?
Well, we'll see that gives our functions
the biggest superpower in JavaScript.